From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel
minutes, a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan and
I'm singing show number three
37. Recorded live Thursday, September
13, 2012. This episode is
brought to you by Tellerik
offering the best in developer
tools and support online@telerikdotcomandbyfranklins.net training
developers to work smarter and
now offering gesture pack a
powerful gesture, recording and recognition
system for Microsoft connect for
windows developers details@gesture.com. In this
episode, Scott talks with Mark Powell,
senior software engineer at jet
propulsion laboratories about his work
on the Mars Lander mission,
including the most recent curiosity.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes. And today on
the line, we've got Mark Powell.
He's a senior software engineer
at jet propulsion laboratory. If
that's not a pretty scary
sounding company, what does jet
propulsion laboratory? And how does
that, how does that relate
to space? Jet propulsion laboratory
was started out in the
forties during world war II
era. The Caltech had a
bunch of people who were
experimenting with rockets and with
a, with an aim to
be able to send observational
satellites and the like, and
just base. And they went
out to the Arroyo Seco
out here near Pasadena, locking
yadda, California, Southern California, and
started firing off rockets and
eventually succeeded in beating several
other institutions in creating unmanned
probes to send into space.
And that was kinda the
start of it. And that
was followed up by, through
the missions to a moon
and Mars and Venus and
elsewhere and Voyagers and things
like Viking Lander in the
seventies, went to Mars and
gave us our first clear
pictures from the surface. And
here we are today, a
couple of rovers on Mars
And you're a software engineer.
How is that different? Like
from a rocket scientist, if
you're like at a party
and someone hears you work
at JPL, do you get
to say, Oh, you know,
I'm a rocket scientist, I
guess we can, although I
suppose it's not entirely fair.
We get to take a
lot of the credit for
people who work directly on
the systems for things like
precision landing. And so a
lot of us have enjoyed
seeing the videos about the
seven minutes of about we're
going to hit the atmosphere
and then there's all this
heats and then there's parachutes
and thrusters and radar, and
all these elements that come
together in perfect synchronicity to
guide this spacecraft down to
the surface of Mars. It
was really just a, you
know, a relatively small team
of people who work on
that. And then other bros
who work on various aspects
of the Rover itself and
the software that is used
to plan for it and
give it its instructions. Someone
said that a lot of
the specs in the hardware
for the Mars Lander were
set a long time ago.
So when they, when people
who were like me layman,
see these specs online, they're
like, well, this is old.
My iPhone has more power
than the Lander with the
why is there such a
lag? Is it, is it
stability or what is it
that's keeping us from putting
the latest and greatest stuff
up in Mars? Yeah, it's
totally a legacy. And totally
just due to the, to
the age of this project,
I have to realize that
Mars science laboratory began as
a project almost 10 years
ago. And you know, when
it was first spec, you
know, what's what it has
as far as computing power
and the amount of memory
and other systems on board
were cutting edge at the
time. And, you know, even
now we're, we're only able
to make smaller increments to
what was then the cutting
edge for systems that have
to operate in space. You
can't just take like the
latest Intel or AMD chips
and go wild with it
without taking some precautionary measures
for operating in an environment
where you can have solar
radiation hits, that will cause
your computers to reboot sporadically
randomly. So the, the compute
elements and electronics and instruments
all operate under the constraints
of operating what they call
a radiation Harmon environment. The,
the rad 6,000 on Mars
exploration rovers and the Rams
seven 50 CPU on curiosity,
those are built to handle
a radiation hardened environment. And
in fact, all of the
kind of CPS that you
have on like GPS satellites
and other kinds of satellites
around the earth also have
that capability in order to
operate in that environment. I
like being safe here on
earth. You know, initially as
someone who's always kind of
working on the latest stuff
on the web, when I
hear that someone's working on
something 10 years old, my
first reaction just as a,
as a geek is I
don't want to work on
old stuff, but then this
might be a funny parallel.
I'm interested in what you
think about this. My, my
Xbox updated recently, and it
got an all new dashboard
and all this new functionality.
And I went online and
X-Box is like eight years
old. And they're shoving all
of this in like eight
megs of space. And then
I said to myself, well,
it would be a real
challenge to make amazing new
functionality on older hardware. And
the fact that it's old
might mean that I might
learn new things about something
old and then say, Oh,
wow, I could exploit this
and I can exploit that.
So it's a, a new
and interesting challenge, even though
the hardware might be older.
Is that a reasonable Parallel
to draw? I think it's
totally reasonable parallel. It is
an interesting challenge to write
software for that environment. I
have the luxury of writing,
mostly ground tools. And so
I get, you know, I
get the pleasure of being
able to use things that
are more modern, you know,
web tools, rich IDs that
run on desktop computers and
that sort of thing. But
for those who have to
create the onboard software, they
have to face that challenge.
They have to say, well,
sure, I want to be
able to create an autonomous
driving algorithm that can recognize
obstacles and keep it Rover
safe, autonomously so that we
have less people in the
loop. And we can do
more with the time that
we have on Mars while
the spacecraft is still alive,
but they have to do
it on a 200 megahertz
CPU with a limited amount
of memory. And so, yeah,
they have to be, that'd
be very clever about the
approaches that they use to
actually implement those out rooms.
How are those decisions made
if you're making ground control
systems, you, you personally right.
Work on, on those systems,
is that right? That's right.
Then, then what if you
say, I want to throw
in this open source library,
or I want to add
this new technique or this
new feature, is that going
to take years of, of
specs and documentation? I'm trying
to get my sense around,
like, I think everyone who's
listened has worked at a
big company before, and they
have that sense of like
big company speed versus startup
speed. You know, you have
a reasonably sized team, but
you got a lot of
moving parts and you got
to get it right. So
I want to get a
sense of how much bureaucracy
is involved in your software
choice. Well, there's certainly is
a bureaucracy involved, you know,
as much as there would
be anywhere else, as far
as open source libraries in
ground software, we've been fortunate
that we've been able to
prove out that using open
source libraries for key elements
of the work that we
do and on operating these
rubbers from the ground, it
can be done at a
lower cost and it can
be done at higher quality
than just writing all the
software ourselves. There, there are
a lot of opensource groups
that are very good at
what they do. And so
for one of the significant
elements of the ground tools
that we use to operate
curiosity, we build it on
top of the eclipse framework.
So the, the eclipse framework
gives us, you know, a
framework for rich desktop application.
Fats has a lot of
things that are given to
us that we don't have
to write ourselves and have
a community of hundreds of
developers who are contributing to
that all the time and
fixing bugs. And, you know,
we don't have that many
developers here. And so we
can build on top of
that and really focus on
our domain more effectively by
making use of the software
framework that is available for
people to build on top
of Isn't there a sense
of pressure though? Like, there's
that old joke of like,
well, this is hard, but
it's not rocket science. And
I always joke about the
difference between writing software in
the kind of the real
world versus writing software for
like medical things or saving
babies. You know, if you're
working on something that's like
a, to do application, like
I'm going to go write
the great, the world's great
new to do list manager.
That's not, you know, saving
babies from cancer and that's
not putting a Lander on
Mars. So we tend to
be a little fast and
loose with our, with our
software, with our choices and
with our things. We don't
all treat the software with
the respect that, that we
might want to. Is there
the sense of reverence when
you're working on this stuff?
Like, man, we can't screw
this up. We got to
write that code slow and
steady and test the heck
out of it. Or can
you be sloppy at all?
Like everyone is, I think
it's much more of the
former when, when you're in
the early stages of the
project, have a lot more
freedoms to experiment and like
take the latest and greatest
of something and say, okay,
I'm just going to prototype
this or I'm going to
sketch it, you know, with
the aim to work with
the people who the software
serving and saying, you know,
if we give you a
tool like this, we'd be
able to do your job
and we'll be more pleasant
experience than say this other
way of doing things. But
as time marches on at
the end of the day,
you have to get the
job done. And so, you
know, it's, it's, it's all
about at this phase now
that we've landed. It's all
about we, we will test
everything before we trusted nothing
is above reproach. So we
were for the first 30
days of this mission and
a lot of our activities
have been pre scripted with
the primary goal of building
confidence that all of the
tools are working in concert
actually operates the way that
we designed them to the
way that we intended them
to. And that's anything unexpected.
It can be investigated, research,
documented anything serious, then, you
know, find a way to
work around it or work
differently. So I'd say we're
somewhere in between the like,
you know, fast and loose
here, let's build, let's build
a bright, shiny thing. That's
going to get a lot
of attention. Maybe it has
a few bugs right now,
but that's okay. And the
light, you know, guiding an
airplane with people's lives or
medical devices or a software
that runs international space station
to keep astronauts alive. It's
kind of the other end
of that spectrum. And, you
know, we're guiding a robot
on Mars and so there's
not human lives at stake,
but nonetheless, you know, a
lot of us have, you
know, a lot of, a
lot invested in this robotic
spacecraft and it's kind of
our avatar and the instruments
themselves are also kind of
the avatars of the scientists
who conceived, propose them and
built them and put them
on the spacecraft. And so,
you know, we, we, we
treat them without the most
reverence and don't ever want
to take any risks that
are warranted, that might jeopardize
their safety. You find that
there's certain personality types that
work best at a place
like JPL. I mean, might
there be a person that
might not be suited for
this, this speed or this
tempo or this attention to
detail in software? Hm. That's
an interesting question. I mean,
I guess I'm saying you
seem very calm and very
measured. I wonder if you
might imagine a world where
you hired someone, let's say
you hired me and you
know, it seems fine, but
then when you bring me
into the team is like,
you know, Hey man, we're
putting a robot on Mars
and you're, you're a little
bit too, too much of
a loose cannon Hanselman. You
know, we're going to have
to ask you to leave.
We're all very relaxed here
and focused. And your, your,
your, your check, your, your
regularly breaking the build. I
think we have, you know,
a wide mix of personality
sites. I think that's fair
to say on, on the
team that I lead or
the operation product that we
build, we definitely have a
good mix. We have some
people who are laid back
and we got some people
who are like, you know,
just kinda naturally caffeinated and
different people in between. We
have some assertive personalities and
we have some passive personalities.
So, you know, it's up,
it's up to the team
to learn how to work
with each other and let
everybody play to their strengths
and make sure that no
one has minimized. But yeah,
I mean, overall, it's a
pretty cool place to work
actually. And we, we tend
to integrate different personalities into
the process fairly well. Very
few exceptions. Do you use
a pair programming? Do you
sit together or do you
do a lot of code?
Some of us do on
my team, we do it
quite a bit. We find
that pair programming is awesome
for breaking through blocks. I
can, like, I can sit
down and I can code
for an entire day trying
to figure out this problem
and, you know, on my
own and just keep banging
my head against it and
get nowhere. And then I
can, you know, tomorrow I
can sit with someone else
for 20 minutes and explain
it to them. And then
after 20 minutes is like,
aha, that's yeah, that's the
direction I needed to go.
So I just burned an
entire day. That was really
costly. So now I've kinda
learned my lesson. So there's,
there's plenty of times when,
you know, you can just
go in and fix a
bug, you know, on your
own, if you know exactly
what's going on, but if
you're building something new, if
there's something that's particularly challenging
than per program, that can
be really advantageous. And we
also like to use it
because it kind of spreads
the spreads, the wealth and
spreads the knowledge we we're,
we're in the fortunate position
of being able to work
with many aspects of operations
from being able to build
a three D visualizations to
show where we are on
Mars and where's the Rover,
and what's it going to
do to like planning out,
you know, the timing and
the constraint and, you know,
the conflicting violations, you know,
resources like, Oh, you can't
use this instrument in this
other system at the same
time, or there's just not
enough power to do that
today, all the way down
to, you know, let's write
the, essentially the script that
the spacecraft is going to
execute today and then being
that up to the spacecraft.
So there's a lot of
interesting problems in a variety
of these broad domain, which
is a spacecraft operations. So
we didn't want anybody to
ever feel like they're like
pigeonholed in one area. And
so, you know, people seem
up in different areas to
make sure that nothing ever
gets old. Can you talk
a little bit about the
difference between the work that
you've done for the last
several years versus what's happening
now that it's actually on
the planet, because I'm sure
that the things have shifted
now that it's landed. You're
not, I mean, I assume
you're not writing the software
for a Lander in another
10 years. I mean, some,
some, some code is stable,
but now you're sending programs
up to it on a
daily basis. Yeah. So I
mean, the system is, is
very, very stable now. And
a lot of the, a
lot of the focus has
shifted to kind of streamlining
the operations of the spacecraft,
like, okay, we have these
capable systems and we're building
trust in them and we
understand, you know, what they
can do, what they can't
do, but we're all living
on Mars time right now.
And the whole process of
building the scripts that are
executed the next day, it
takes about 16 hours. We
want to cut that down
as soon as possible, because
what that will allow us
to do is that will
allow us to shift to
a more earth time schedule,
where we can, you know,
get up and work like,
you know, nine to six
type of hours, a few
months from now versus the
always change in kinds of
hours that we're putting in
right now, Mars time. I
mean, what's the number of
hours on Mars. I mean,
it's more than just being
in a different time zone.
Oh, it's, it's very much
more than being in different
times because different times zones
on the earth it's fixed.
Because the thing about working
on Mars, working in this
kind of semi tele operated
semi-autonomous mission is that the
Mars name is very close
to the earth day, but
just different enough to make
it a huge pain in
the neck for people on
earth. They actually try to
work on Mars. The second
on Mars is just a
little bit longer than the
second owner. You have, you
have a day that's about
24 hours plus 39 and
a half minutes. And so
that boils down to is
that a second on Mars
is 300 of a second,
approximately longer than an earth
second. And so that, that
has the effect of, we
want to, we want to
start our planning at night
when the Rover is finished
and have it ready for
it in the morning when
it's ready to wake up
and do something else, we
don't, we mainly want to
operate during daylight hours for
obvious reasons. Like we want,
we want to have sun
so that we can take
pictures with, you know, an
ambient elimination. We don't want
to take pictures in the
dark and that sort of
thing. So, but, but what
that means is that you're,
you're, you're getting up and
coming into work if you're
working every day, about 40
minutes later, every day. And
so when we landed, we
like started at midnight and
we're like, Oh, all right,
this is cool. We're programmers.
You know, we're used to
being in accolades and going
to bed late in the
morning and, you know, kind
of living the nightlife, but
that only lasted a week.
Pretty soon we were coming
in at 4:00 AM. Then we're
coming in at 8:00 AM and
he's like, Oh my gosh,
this is not so good.
And so it's been about
30 days now, we've rotated
almost completely around and to
have to do it two
more times, by the time
we get to 90 days.
And then if, if we're
successful after that third time,
we will have learned enough
about how to make our
operations process more efficient and
kind of patch our tools
and add new capabilities to
help us with that so
that we don't have to
do it a fourth time.
That would be really great
for the people who are
working here. It's very exciting
working on Mars, but after
three, three times of that's,
I went through it on
a spirit and opportunity going
through. And again, now it's,
it can be tough for
the home life. Especially if
you have a family at
home, you know, children who
want to see mommy or
daddy, and they don't, they
don't get to see them
as often as they did
before. So I want to
want to make the most
of our time on Mars,
we want to, you know,
be able to sustain that
for a long period of
time. Cause we have a,
we have a mission, a
nominal mission for curiosity. That's
about two years with the
expectation of hopefully even more
than that afterward. Wow. So
if you've got a 24
hour and 40 minutes or
39 minutes, long day, and
are you referring to time?
Are you saying it's nine,
nine o'clock on Mars. And
do you have a watch
that set tomorrow's time? Yeah.
A lot of us have
different ways of coping with
that. A lot of the
planning and scheduling during the
day does happen and is
announced during Mars time. So
we have like 24 hour
clocks that are, you know,
digital clocks that are wired
tomorrow's time. Some people have
watches, some people have, you
know, apps for their iPhone
or Android that have Mars
time. There's one of our
Rover drivers is also an
Android developer and created a
Mars time app for himself.
And, you know, some people
have created alarm clocks that
are on Mars time. They
like hacked into a digital
alarm clock so they can
sit there, alarm on Mars
time and get up for
their shifts to the right
time every day. And there's
a, there's a watchmaker here
in town who for a
couple of hundred dollars, we'll
adjust a watch for you
to make the crystal workings
of it, you know, just
a little bit floor, so
that it'll give you a
Mars time on your wrist.
If you want to wear
it for a little bit,
this indulging, that Formalize though,
you haven't like sat down
as a group and decided
like, like what do you
call that extra 39 and
a half minutes? Is that
midnight? Or is that just
an extra long maintenance midnight,
a hundred minutes long is
that hour between 11 and
midnight, a hundred minutes long
instead of 60. So no,
the, the minutes and the
hours and the, and the
days all work the same,
there's 24 hours and 60
minutes, 60 seconds a minute.
And all of that, it's
just that the seconds are
long. And so, yeah. So,
so you have to, you
have to algorithmically map what
Mars time is to what
earth time is. And so,
yeah. Yeah. I see. I
tried to, in my mind,
I tried to map it
like it was a time
zone and you just kind
of reminded me that, wait
a second. No, if we
are taking this longer time
and dividing by 24, everything
changes, minutes are slightly longer.
Seconds are slightly longer, so
it could be 11 o'clock,
but it's a stretchy 11
o'clock That's right. That's right.
We keep, we keep it
all, you know, based on
what was originally the Babylonians,
right. We have, we have,
we have 67 minutes, 62nd,
60 minute hours and 24
hour days. But they are
in fact actually just a
little bit longer, but we
kind of ignore that when
we're working on Mars, because
we want the time systems
to make, to make sense
intuitively for what people expect.
It's like, okay, two Mars
hours from now, we're going
to have this thing. And
so we have like Gantt
charts and schedule meetings laid
out, okay, we're going to
start at this time local
mean solar time. And it's
going to be two hours
long. And, And I know
as someone who's worked in
international banking myself that time
zone math is like the
number one most painful thing
that there is to deal
with. And once you add
in things like leap seconds,
you know, just everything goes
to heck, how are you
managing that? Like I know
that one of the things
we do on earth is
we focus on GMT, right?
Do everything in Zulu time
and adjust from there. What
is the clock on the
actual Rover set to versus
maybe your web servers running
some software that you wrote,
Right? So there's there there's
many different types of systems
in places, the earth time
system. Then there's also kind
of a, a nominal Mars
time system that has time
zones and the whole thing.
So they've defined 24 time
zones on Mars. And so
curiosity is in one of
them. And we use, you
know, local means solar time
to compute times that happen,
you know, on the average,
in that time zone. And
then there's local true solar
time. That is accurate to
exactly where the Rover is.
That's useful for some other
calculations like computing or simulating,
how much heat the spacecraft
is going to experience on
any given day. And then
the spacecraft clock itself is
just a computer clock on
a chip and it has
drifts and we have to
model that and, and work
with that. And so there's,
you know, there's lookup tables
and software that will convert.
Okay. What, how many, how
many spacecraft clock seconds was
this image taken for example,
and what does that in
local mean solar time? What
does that local truth all
the time? What does that
MGMT? And so we have
a whole framework software framework
developed at JPL called spice
that helps us with that.
It's used on many different
missions to Mars and elsewhere
to handle all these time
conversions for us. So we
kind of rely on that
to algorithmically convert between all
these times systems that we
need to run. And this,
this might be a fullest
question or a wrong question,
but how do you know
you're right? Like how do
you, you're not there? How
do you know that this
is really how it works?
I mean, it's all PhDs
with math on paper who
are pretty sure things work
this way. Well, there's a
number of ways we can
kind of check ourselves. One
of them is to observe
the sun. For example, if,
if our spice routines tell
us that at a certain
time, we expect, you know,
Mars to be at this
position and rotated around its
axis by this much and
the sun to be at
this relative location, then we
can put the camera up
and take a picture of
the sun and look at,
you know, where was the
Rover and what was its
heading and what was the
pointing vector of the camera
at the sun at that
time and say, yeah, okay.
We're, we're doing fine. You
know, where the sun is.
We know when it was
there. Do you do that
often? I mean, do you
have to check your, do
you'd have to check your
work? And is there anything
that you discovered once you
got there? You're like, Oh
wow, we totally got that
wrong. And we had, now
we have to adjust for
it after the fact, now
that it's landed, We do
check it a lot. We
have been fortunate that we
haven't found any significant errors
yet in the time systems.
But as I was saying
before, the, the spacecraft clock
itself does have, and so
eventually it's going to, you
know, tend to, you know,
start to lag or start
to move forward from where
it has been before. And
so we have to continually
watch it to compensate for
that and kind of adjust
the look up tables that
we're using to convert from
the spacecraft time to the
standardized time systems. And Now
that that drift is being
adjusted, how differently from how
it might be adjusted on
my PC that I'm sitting
at looking. Right, right. Right
now, like I have a
time server, so I don't
have to worry about that.
Right. I have NTP and
I can let the atomic
clock in Colorado figure this
stuff out for me. And
you are effectively your own
atomic clock up there, aren't
you? Well, it's a definitely,
wouldn't call it an atomic
clock. I mean, it's just,
it's just a, it's just
a crystal on a chip.
Right? So The point is,
you're saying, when you say
drift, you're saying there's a
flaw here. That is a,
not a flaw as, as
yet, but there's a characteristic
of this that we know
to be unreliable, be the
right word. Or is it
reliably unreliable? Well, I mean
there's errors and everything, and
you know, you're, so you're,
you're, you're crystal on a
chip is only going to
oscillates. No. So many times
per second, in an ideal
sense for so long before
the, before, whatever error is
inherent in that process starts
to accumulate. And, you know,
may take 200 days, may
take 2000 days, but eventually
it's going to add a
second or subtract a second
or whatever it's going to
do. Nothing's perfect. So we
just watch for things like
that and, and adjust for
it. Then as we notice
them, One of the things
that we, who in the
software industry on earth have
been watching with a lot
of excitement is this, this
openness, I, people that seem
to consistently surprised with everyone's
use of open source and
their interest in open sourcing
stuff. Why are there so
few secrets, Why are there
so few secrets? I wish
there were fewer secrets. We,
we, we really like, you
know, incorporating open source libraries
and systems in, into our
systems for a number of
reasons. Like I was saying
earlier. One is that for
core specific domains that are
kind of the same, whether
you're working in space or,
you know, work in a
bank or, or anywhere else,
there are, there are some
systems out in open source
for, for building frameworks, for
just getting computing done that
are terrific. And it would
cost a lot for us
to duplicate. And so it
makes one ask the question,
well, why, why are tax
payers paying us to duplicate
systems that are terrific, that
already exist? And, and so,
you know, we ask ourselves
those questions and say, well,
Hey, we can, we can
do a better job for
this mission for NASA, by,
you know, learning and using,
you know, and vetting this
particular open source library to
do this aspect of our
work and allowing ourselves to
spend more time on learning
how to operate the spacecraft
better or improve these features
that are going to make
things more efficient. And a
part of working in the
space aerospace domain in the
United States is dealing with the
legal rules that we operate
under in this country. We
have ITR, which is a
set of federal laws that
limits what information can be
freely distributed, pertaining to articles
of war. And as it
happens, spacecrafts that are flown
to space or other planets
or moons also fall into
that category. And so there's
actually a lot of information
that we are legally bound
to keep in house. And
then there's also obviously proprietary
information like at any institution
to maintain a competitive advantage.
You want to have a
prietary information, be protected and
living in house, but wherever
possible, if it's, if it's
information, for example, like that
has come back from the
spacecraft on Mars, and it's
not per se proprietary. It's
not, you know, it's something
that was the end result
of operating the spacecraft, but
it wasn't the operation of
the spacecraft on Mars. It's
like a picture that was
taken or the location of
the Rover today. There's no
reason not to share that
information with everyone who has
a stake in this, which
are all the taxpayers who
pay for it. Very cool.
Well, we appreciate it. I
mean, we just, the fact
that I'm even able to
talk to you is pretty
awesome, frankly. Cool. Thanks. Yeah.
It's always a treat for
us to be able to
talk to people about what
we do. We're very excited
about it. Thanks a lot.
That's Mark Powell from the jet
propulsion laboratory and working on
the ground software operating curiosity
on Mars right now. This
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes. We'll see you
again next week.